Release Notes for MRST 2012b

Introduction to MRST 2012b
------------------------------

MRST 2012b is a major release in terms of new features. We especially
highlight the following new features:
   * A new module for fully implicit simulators with automatic Jacobian
     calculations.
   * A new module for doing flow diagnostics.
   * A new module for Discrete Fracture Matrix (DFM) simulations.
   * The previously separate module for vertical equilibrium CO2 models
     has been integrated into MRST as a regular module.

Acknowledgements
----------------
Work by the following developers constitutes this release of MRST
   * Stein Krogstad
   * Knut-Andreas Lie
   * Olav Møyner
   * Halvor Møll Nilsen
   * Bård Skaflestad

The developers would also like to acknowledge the following people for
valuable contributions to this release of MRST
   * Jostein R. Natvig
   * Eirik Keilegavlen
   * Tor Harald Sandve
   * Jhonatan Camacho

Olav Møyner acted as primary release manager for MRST 2012b.


New developments in MRST 2012b
------------------------------
We would like to point out a number of new developments in this release
   * MRST 2012b introduces a framework for creating simulators based on
     automatic differentiation. This enables fast prototyping of new
     models for reservoir flow since the computation of Jacobians is
     done automatically. Included within are three fully implicit
     simulators which use automatic differentiation:
       o A black oil simulator (Oil/Water/Gas with gas dissolved in oil)
       o A oil and water simulator
       o A oil, water and polymer simulator

     These three simulators use the same functions for most of the
     solution logic, demonstrating how new models can be implemented
     rapidly. Included in this framework is a generic Constrained
     Pressure Residual (CPR) preconditioner which enables the use of
     specialized elliptic solvers on the pressure system. All the
     solvers are enabled for use with adjoint optimization, producing
     analytic derivatives suitable for optimization loops. Additionally,
     the implementation includes a simple framework for Proper
     Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) which allows for model reduction
     based on previous solutions of the same system.

     To activate the fully implicit module, enter

         mrstModule add ad-fi

     Please note that the fully implicit solvers are still under active
     development. Especially functionality relating to wells and linear
     equation solvers should be regarded as beta software which is
     subject to change.

   * A flow diagnostics module that includes tracer partitioning and
     time of flight calculations for upscaling evaluation and analysis
     of well effects.
   * The previously separate vertical-equilibrium module has been
     integrated into MRST and is released along with the 2012b
     release. New in this version is an implementation based on
     saturation values which can be used with existing solvers. A
     general effort has been done to make the implementation easier to
     read and maintain.
   * The upscaling module has been updated with functions for relative
     permeability upscaling, including functionality for capillary and
     viscous limits as well as rudimentary support for periodic grids.
   * A new module for Discrete Fracture Matrix (DFM) simulations
     contributed by Tor Harald Sandve and Eirik Keilegavlen. This module
     lets users solve problems involving fractures on unstructured grids
     and can be loaded with mrstModule add dfm.
   * Some common MRST idioms have been added to the gridtools module to
     make prototyping easier for developers unfamiliar with MRST
     internals. See gridAddHelpers for more information.
   * A simple volume renderer has been added under the name
     plotGridVolumes. While computationally more expensive than existing
     plotting functions, it allows at a glance visualization of inner
     parts of 3D grids. The syntax is similar to plotCellData.
   * Support for MRST on Windows has in general been improved as a
     general effort has been made to repair the build process on Windows
     for compiled (.mex) files and other utilities using OS specific
     features.
   * The deckformat module has been updated with preliminary support for
     reading restart and summary files. Note that this functionality is
     not considered mature and is limited to partial support for the
     version 7 of the EGRID format.

Upgrade Notes
-------------
The following user-visible changes have been made to existing functions
and data structures since the previous release of MRST.

   * The function removeCells now correctly alters geometry fields when
     given a grid where computeGeometry has been applied.
   * The function plotWell has been altered to give better default plots
     when called with default parameters for both realistic and
     synthetic grids.
   * The function refineUniform in the agglom module now correctly
     refines 1xN strips of cells.
   * Corrected two programming errors in the deckformat module that,
     together, contributed to a size mismatch and subsequent assignment
     error when attempting to expand a PVTO table through translating
     two independent undersaturated data records into earlier records.
   * The function upscalePerm in the upscaling module now defaults to
     TPFA discretizations. A new keyword ‘method’ can be used to
     reselect mimetic discretization for cases when grid orientation
     effects are significant.
   * The following files has been moved from the msmfem module to the
     coarsegrid module:
        compressPartition
        partitionCartGrid
        partitionLayers
        partitionUI
        processPartition
   * The msmfem module is no longer loaded by default. Note that along
     with the changes to the coarsegrid module, this may mean that
     existing programs written for MRST now depend on the coarsegrid
     module. Users should update their files accordingly. If you
     experience error messages such as

         Undefined function 'partitionUI' for input arguments
         of type 'struct'.

     this indicates that the script depends on the coarsegrid module.
